1. Create a Cloud Organization with Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)
(a) AWS: Using AWS Organizations and IAM

AWS Organizations enables you to create a multi-account structure for centralized management, with IAM for RBAC. The goal is to set up an organization, create accounts, and define roles with specific permissions.
Step-by-Step Procedure

    Sign in to AWS Management Console
        Access https://console.aws.amazon.com/ as the root user or an IAM user with administrative privileges.
        Console Screen Description: The AWS Management Console homepage displays a search bar, a list of recently visited services, and a navigation menu. Search for “AWS Organizations” or select it under “Management & Governance.”
    Create an AWS Organization
        Navigate to AWS Organizations > click Create an organization.
        Choose Enable all features for full functionality (e.g., consolidated billing, service control policies).
        Console Screen Description: The “Create organization” screen shows two options: “Enable all features” (recommended) or “Consolidated billing only.” A confirmation prompt appears after creation, displaying the organization’s root ID (e.g., o-xxxxxxxxxx).
        Your root account becomes the management account.
    Create Organizational Units (OUs)
        In AWS Organizations, go to Organize accounts > Root > click Create an organizational unit.
        Name the OU (e.g., “Development” or “Production”).
        Repeat to create additional OUs as needed (e.g., “Test”, “Prod”).
        Console Screen Description: The “Organize accounts” tab shows a hierarchical tree with the “Root” node. Clicking “Create an organizational unit” opens a form to input the OU name and parent (default is Root).
    Create Member Accounts
        In AWS Organizations, go to Accounts > click Create an account.
        Enter an account name (e.g., “DevAccount”) and email (unique, e.g., dev+account@yourdomain.com).
        Assign the account to an OU (e.g., “Development”).
        Console Screen Description: The “Create an account” form includes fields for account name, email, and OU selection. After creation, the account appears under the selected OU in the “Accounts” tab.
    Set Up RBAC with IAM Roles
        Navigate to the IAM service in the management account.
        Create a role for cross-account access:
            Go to Roles > Create role > select AWS account as the trusted entity.
            Enter the member account ID (12-digit number from the member account’s “My Account” page).
            Attach policies (e.g., AmazonS3ReadOnlyAccess for read-only S3 access).
            Name the role (e.g., “DevS3ReadRole”) and create it.
        In the member account, create an IAM user or group:
            Go to Users > Add users, create a user (e.g., “DevUser”).
            Assign permissions to assume the role by attaching an inline policy (see artifact below).
        Console Screen Description: The IAM “Create role” wizard includes steps for selecting a trusted entity, adding permissions, and naming the role. The “Add users” form includes username, access type (console or programmatic), and permissions assignment options.
    Apply Service Control Policies (SCPs)
        In AWS Organizations, go to Policies > Service control policies > click Create policy.
        Define a policy to restrict actions (e.g., deny EC2 instance launches in certain regions).
        Attach the SCP to an OU or account.
        Console Screen Description: The “Create policy” screen provides a JSON editor for SCP definitions and fields for policy name and description. The “Policies” tab lists all SCPs with options to attach them to OUs or accounts.

Artifact: IAM Role Trust Policy and AssumeRole Policy

{
  "TrustPolicy": {
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
      {
        "Effect": "Allow",
        "Principal": {
          "AWS": "arn:aws:iam::MEMBER_ACCOUNT_ID:root"
        },
        "Action": "sts:AssumeRole"
      }
    ]
  },
  "AssumeRolePolicy": {
    "Version": "2012-10-17",
    "Statement": [
      {
        "Effect": "Allow",
        "Action": "sts:AssumeRole",
        "Resource": "arn:aws:iam::MANAGEMENT_ACCOUNT_ID:role/DevS3ReadRole"
      }
    ]
  }
}

(b) Azure: Using Management Groups and Azure RBAC

Azure uses Management Groups for organizational hierarchy and Azure Role-Based Access Control (RBAC) for permissions management.
Step-by-Step Procedure

    Sign in to Azure Portal
        Access https://portal.azure.com/ with an account that has Global Administrator privileges.
        Portal Screen Description: The Azure Portal dashboard displays a search bar, favorite services, and a resource group list. Search for “Management groups” or select it under “All services.”
    Create a Management Group
        Navigate to Management groups > click Start using management groups (if not already enabled).
        Click Create > enter a Management Group ID (e.g., “OrgRoot”) and display name (e.g., “Organization Root”).
        Portal Screen Description: The “Management groups” page shows an “Add management group” button. The creation form includes fields for ID and display name, with a hierarchy view showing the tenant root group.
    Create Child Management Groups
        In Management groups, select the root group > click New management group.
        Create groups like “Development” or “Production” with unique IDs (e.g., “DevMG”, “ProdMG”).
        Portal Screen Description: The “New management group” form is similar to the root group creation, with an option to select the parent group (e.g., “OrgRoot”).
    Add Subscriptions
        Go to Subscriptions, note the IDs of existing subscriptions, or create a new one.
        In Management groups, select an OU (e.g., “Development”) > click Add subscription > select a subscription ID.
        Portal Screen Description: The “Add subscription” option in a management group’s details page lists available subscriptions with checkboxes for selection.
    Set Up RBAC
        Navigate to Management groups > select a group (e.g., “Development”) > click Access control (IAM).
        Click Add role assignment > select a role (e.g., “Contributor” for full resource management).
        Assign the role to a user, group, or service principal (e.g., a user named “DevUser”).
        For granular permissions, create a custom role:
            Go to Subscriptions > Access control (IAM) > Add > Add custom role.
            Define permissions in JSON (see artifact below).
        Portal Screen Description: The “Add role assignment” screen includes tabs for role selection, member selection (users/groups), and conditions. The “Add custom role” wizard provides a JSON editor or permission checkboxes.

Artifact: Azure Custom Role Definition

{
  "Name": "DevWebAppManager",
  "Description": "Custom role for managing web apps in Development group",
  "Actions": [
    "Microsoft.Web/sites/*",
    "Microsoft.Storage/storageAccounts/read"
  ],
  "NotActions": [],
  "AssignableScopes": [
    "/subscriptions/SUBSCRIPTION_ID/managementGroups/DevMG"
  ]
}

(c) GCP: Using Organizations and IAM

GCP uses an organization resource and projects for hierarchy, with IAM for RBAC.
Step-by-Step Procedure

    Sign in to Google Cloud Console
        Access https://console.cloud.google.com/ with an account that has Organization Administrator privileges.
        Console Screen Description: The GCP Console dashboard shows a project selector, recent resources, and a navigation menu. Search for “IAM & Admin” or select it from the menu.
    Set Up an Organization
        Navigate to IAM & Admin > Manage Resources.
        If no organization exists, link your domain to GCP via Google Workspace or Cloud Identity (requires setup outside GCP).
        Once created, the organization appears at the top of the resource hierarchy.
        Console Screen Description: The “Manage Resources” page displays a hierarchy with an “Organization” node (if set up) or prompts to create one. A domain verification step may appear if not linked.
    Create Folders
        In Manage Resources, select the organization > click Create folder.
        Name the folder (e.g., “Development” or “Production”).
        Repeat for additional folders.
        Console Screen Description: The “Create folder” form includes fields for folder name and parent (organization or another folder). The hierarchy updates to show new folders.
    Create Projects
        In Manage Resources, select a folder > click Create project.
        Enter a project name (e.g., “DevProject”) and assign it to a folder (e.g., “Development”).
        Console Screen Description: The “Create project” form includes project name, organization, and folder selection fields. New projects appear under the selected folder.
    Set Up RBAC with IAM
        Navigate to IAM & Admin > IAM.
        Select the organization, folder, or project level > click Add.
        Enter a member (e.g., user email like “devuser@yourdomain.com”) and assign a role (e.g., “Compute Admin”).
        For custom roles, go to Roles > Create role > define permissions (see artifact below).
        Console Screen Description: The “IAM” page lists members and roles, with an “Add” button opening a form for member email, role selection, and conditions. The “Create role” page provides a permission picker or JSON edito


        {
  "title": "DevComputeManager",
  "description": "Custom role for managing Compute Engine in Development",
  "includedPermissions": [
    "compute.instances.create",
    "compute.instances.delete",
    "compute.instances.get"
  ],
  "stage": "GA"
}
